Waihi is located on the East side of the North Island, North of Tauranga. In 1878, amongst a series of other gold discoveries around the rest of New Zealand (and the World), Gold was discovered in Waihi. In just a few years, mining in the town increased drastically. The accessible ore was quickly exhausted, and the mining company began optimizing the processes of gold extraction by investing in more complex techniques, including battery stamping, cyanide extraction, and increasingly deep and intricate mine shafts. In order to accomodate these new techniques, the Waihi Mining Company began investigating potential electricity generation sites, quickly deciding on the Horahora Rapids on the Waikato River in 1906. Unfortunately, the government of the time had it's own plans for an electricity generation facility at Huka Falls near the source of the river at Lake Taupo, and the company's application to build the station was declined. At the time, this caused an outcry at the concept of what was seen by many as the government standing in the way of private enterprise in order to gain a profit from it's own (eventual) generating capacity. The mining company could not afford the increase in cost to construct power lines to Huka Falls, and expressed frustration at the potential time the government would take to construct such a generation facility (indeed, no hydroelectric station existed at the Huka Falls until the mid-1930s). Eventually, after the mining company threatened a downsize in production and staffing due to the high costs of generation via steam and coal, several critisims of the Huka Falls scheme and significant public pressure to allow the scheme, an agreement was reached between the Waihi Mining Company and the Government in December 1909 to develop a 7,000 kilowatt station at the Horahora Rapids.