Hydroelectricity was the first wholesale source of electricity in New Zealand - the country's ample supply of waterfalls and rivers made the installation of generating equipment comparatively simple compared to other methods. Modern hydroelectricity generation generally focusses on a change in altitude - either naturally via water diverted from a higher lake or river, or artificially via a dam. In the era of Horahora Power Station, however, the normal technique was to find a river or stream with a consistent and strong current that would be diverted through turbines located at water level. The station stuck with this pattern, although it was one of the largest examples to do so, and one of the few in the country to not take advantage of a natural change in altitude before the advent of hydro-dam construction.

The Horahora Power Station was located at the end of a 'head race' approximately 400 meters long and 25 meters deep that bypassed the Horahora Rapids. The station building itself was to be a rectangular building that spanned the head race, with intake gates on one side of the building directing water through the turbine blades, and out the other side of the building, where the tail race discharged the water back into the river. The transformer house and other support buildings were positioned adjacent to the power house, but higher up on the river bank (since the power house was built to be just above normal river level).

When the river was in flood, control gates at the top of the head race could be partially or entirely closed, which would divert water across a small spillway dam to follow the original course of the river. 