In New Zealand, there's a comprehensive network of electricity transmission lines covering the country. In the early 1900s though, any organization considering the installation of a power station had to factor in not just the cost of constructing the station, but also the cost of erecting transmission lines to wherever the electricity was required.

In the case of the Horahora Power Station, the cost of these lines was a major factor towards selecting the station's location, as the transmission lines would only have to run 80 kilometers to reach Waihi to power the gold mines there. Initially, the Waihi Gold Mine Company faced opposition from the government of the time, who wished to build their own station further upriver at Huka Falls near Taupo, and sell the company electricity generated there. The company revealed that the cost of constructing lines that far south would cost double what they would to Horahora, making the project economically unfeasible, and cancelled the project in 1906. This caused an outcry amongst the local town boards, who had been looking to Horahora Power Station to provide affordable electricity with transmission lines easily constructed as far north as Auckland, and eventually the government granted permission to build the station in ???? (1910?). The Huka Falls power station was never built.

Additional transmission lines were constructed throughout the stations life, until it was eventually connected to the rapidly-growing national grid, contributing power along with other stations in the North and South Islands until Horahora was decommissioned in 1947. At the peak of its life, the station was providing power to most of the North Island. (FACT CHECK)